Title: Resume
Author: Cesar Saez
Tags: demoreel, reel, showreel, rigging, character td

# Cesar Saez

## Contact Information
* Nationality: Chilean
* Current City: Sydney, Australia
* Phone Number: ---
* E-mail: <hi@cesarsaez.me>
* Website: <http://cesarsaez.me>
* Languages: Spanish, English

## Specialties
* Very strong skills in technical threads as character rigging and programming.
* Knoledge of all the processes in a 3D production.
* Proved experience with software such as Maya, Softimage and 3dsmax.

---

## Experience

### Senior Character TD at _Animal Logic_
February 2015 - Present (Sydney, Australia)


### Lecturer at _ANIMUM School_
July 2014 – July 2014 (Malaga, Spain)

I gave a talk on how to develop a character picker for Autodesk Maya, during
the talk we explored the technology behind different types of character
pickers, including working code for a picker built using maya commands, a qt
version and a proposal for a canvas based using the qt graphics view framework.

Slide deck: <http://cesarsaez.me/slides_picker>

Sample code: <http://github.com/csaez/slides_picker/tree/master/picker>

### Freelancer Rigging Consultant
October 2013 - November 2013

Troubleshooting and optimization of the character rigs for _The Pit and The
Pendulum_, part of _Extraordinary Tales_, an animated anthology of 5 stories
adapted from _Edgar Allan Poe_.

Directed by _Raul García_ and narrated by _Guillermo del Toro_.

### Freelancer Character TD at _Able&Baker S.L._
May 2013 - November 3013 (Madrid, Spain)

Worked as character TD in the upcoming TV series `Momochi` developing the hero
character rig and animation tools.

### Pipeline Consultant at _Ideas Fijas_
September 2013 - Octuber 2013 (San Luis, Argentina)

Evaluation and diagnostic of the production pipeline for the upcoming animated
feature film _Kiribati_.

### Lecturer at _San Luis Digital_
September 2013 – September 2013 (San Luis, Argentina)

I lectured at SLD on how agile methodologies were used to manage the rigging
department during the production of "Justin and the Knights of Valour" and the
basics of production pipeline for CG animated films.

Slide deck: <http://cesarsaez.me/slides_anim>

### Rigging Supervisor at _Kandor Graphics_
August 2010 – July 2012 (Granada, Spain)

Working on the animated feature film _Justin and the Knights of Valour_, my
responsabilities included:

- Coordinating the people within the rigging team and the department itself
  inside the whole production plan.
- Develops tools and plug-ins to optimize animation and rigging workflow.
- Implements animation control rigging systems for complex characters and
  props.
- Oversees the characters, vehicles and props rigging through the animation
  pipeline.
- Troubleshoot and wrangle character-rigging issues for artists within various
  disciplines.

### Lecturer at _University of Granada_
January 2012 – January 2012 (Granada, Spain)

During 2 days I gave a lecture at the University of Granada explaining rigging
basics (for animators).

I talked about human anatomy, how the software works internally (in terms of
transformation inheritance and order of evaluation), basics of
rigging/deformation and tips on how a bit of rigging background can help
animators to solve problems in a daily basis.

### Lecturer at _Kandor Graphics_
July 2011 – July 2011 (Granada, Spain)

'Softimage ICE' Fundamental Course, with special focus in scalar data
management, custom deformers and particle behaviour.

### Senior Character TD at _Kandor Graphics_
April 2009 – August 2010 (Granada, Spain)

Working on the animated feature film `Justin and the Knights of Valour`, my
responsabilities included:

- Implements animation control rigging systems for complex characters and
  props.
- Oversees the characters, vehicles and props rigging through the animation
  pipeline.
- Develops tools and plug-ins to optimize animation and rigging workflow.
- Troubleshoot and wrangle character-rigging issues for artists within various
  disciplines.

### Lecturer at _Kandor Graphics_
July 2010 – July 2010 (Granada, Spain)

I gave a 'Rigging' fundamental course (Softimage), with special focus on native
deformers, expressions, constraints, enveloping and shape keys.

### Freelancer Character TD at _Gizmo Studio_
September 2009 – October 2009 (Buenos Aires, Argentina)

Working on an _Honda_ TV comercial, my responsabilities here were:

- Develop the universal/generic character rig.
- JellyFish character (modeling, texture/shading and rigging).

### Freelancer Character TD at _Digital Rebel Animation Studio_
August 2009 - September 2009 (Barcelona, Spain)

I worked developing the tools to automate the creation of facial rigs for the
upcoming animated TV series `Holy Monks`.

### Lecturer at _Gizmo Studio_
November 2008 – January 2009 (Buenos Aires, Argentina)

I gave a Rigging fundamental course on Autodesk 3dsmax.

### Lead Character TD at _Gizmo Studio_
March 2008 - January 2009 (Buenos Aires, Argentina)

I worked on several TV Commercials doing tasks such as

- Character rigging.
- Developing tools to optimize the animation and rigging workflow.
- Character animation.

### Freelancer Character TD at _McFly Studio_
August 2008 - December 2008 (Buenos Aires, Argentina)

Working on the upcoming animated TV series `El ángel de la música` developing
the rig of hero characters.


### Character TD at _Ideas Fijas_
January 2007 - March 2008 (San Luis, Argentina)

I worked on the animated shortfilm `AnCiedades` doing tasks such as:

- Developing custom facial rigs.
- Character Animation.

### Generalist at _3dmedia_
January 2006 - December 2006 (Santiago, Chile)

Working as generalist on several architecture visualization projects.

---

## Education

### Universidad Central, Chile
- Academic Degree of Bachelor of Science in Construction Engineering,
  Engineering.
- Professional Degree of Construction Engineer (passed with _distinction_),
  Engineering.

### Independent Coursework

* Crafting Quality Code (University of Toronto, Coursera)
* Introduction to Interactive Programming in Python (Rice University, Coursera)
* Introduction to Systematic Program Design (The University of British
  Columbia, Coursera)
* Discrete Optimization (The University of Melbourne - Coursera)
* Coding the Matrix: Linear Algebra through Computer Science Applications
  (Brown University, Coursera)
* The Language of Hollywood: Storytelling, Sound, and Color (Wesleyan
  University, Coursera)
* A Beginner's Guide to Irrational Behavior (Duke University, Coursera)
* Linear and Discrete Optimization (École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
  Coursera)
* Algorithmic Thinking (Rice University, Coursera)
* English course (Duolingo)

---

## Recommendations

The following is a selection of recommendations from
<http://linkedin.com/in/cesarsaez>

_Iker J. de los Mozos_, Character TD at Walt Disney Animation Studios,
> “It's a true pleasure working with César everyday. He finds solutions for
> problems that no one came up with yet, and contributes to the department
> doing a solid and fast work, always raising the bar in each assignment.
>
> His strong will to help people here in the studio makes him also very
> appreciated.”

---

_Samy Fecih_, Character Animator at DreamWorks Animation India,
> “I've been working with Cesar on Justin, he was a pleasure to work with,
> Cesar always had the patience and the can do attitude in front of the
> animators expectations, he was very professional and he contributed a lot in
> the good relationship between the rigging and the animation department.
>
> He's definitely a good assets to have in your team!”

---

_Juan Miguel Vadell_, Senior Character Animator at Sony Pictures Imageworks,
> “He was the head of rigging department and he did a great job managing his
> team and all the animation department requirements. Of course he is a very
> talented rigger but his "best skills" are in his personality, he is always
> with a smile in his face and he drove a wonderful relationship between both
> departments (animators and riggers) making much easier the job to the
> animators.”

---

_Horacio Mendoza_, Lead FX Technical Director at Framestore CFC,
> “I know César since he started to work in Argentina few years ago, from the
> beginning he's been a smart person with an amazing attitude, with great
> technical knowledges and always learning and investigating by himself in
> order to improve his skills. He like to solve problems, find several ways to
> manage issues on any platform, and ready to share his knowledge as well. He's
> also a passionate about art and has great eyes to details. A nice person to
> work with.”

---

_Ricard Miras_, Co-owner at Juggernaut Animation Studio,
> “The best assets of César are their creativity in front of problems and his
> incredible human touch.
>
> During his time as Lead Character TD, he worked to provide flexibility and
> reliability to the rigs, as well as tools for all the departments.
>
> Then he took the helm of the rigging department and thanks to him we were
> able to work as a solid team, bringing solutions for all the studio, and
> facing long-term goals for next productions. And after all this, it seems
> that we only scratch the surface of his ideas and potential.”

---

_Ángel Pavón_, Senior R&D Software Developer at Ilion Animation Studios,
> “César has an excellent balance of innovation and productivity. He is always
> thinking about faster, cleaner and reusable ways to achieve things but never
> forgets that his tools and rigs will be used by people in a real production.
>
> Furthermore, he likes teamwork and is willing to help colleagues. I am lucky
> to be working with him.”

---

_Ernesto Esteso_, Character Animator at Sony Pictures Imageworks,
> “I've been working with César over the last year at Kandor, and I can only
> take my hat off with his work.
>
> César is an excellent rigger, making rigs that are very ease to use, very
> stable, and the most important for me, I can work with them in real time. He
> is always searching for new tools to implement in his rigs, to make them even
> better.
>
> I recommend him without any doubt.”

---

_Emily Döhler-Knox_, Animator at Mikros Image,
> “I had the opportunity to work with César at Kandor Graphics. He created rigs
> that were good, fast, and easy to use for the Animators. He is a team player
> who is always positive and professional. It was a pleasure working with César
> and I think he would be an asset to any studio.”

---

_Juan Siquier_, Surfacing Supervisor at Kandor Graphics,
> “I have worked with Cesar in several 3D projects at Kandor Graphics and I can
> say he ́s a good professional who will commit to 100% in any project with
> remarkable technical skills and great abilities for rigging.
>
> In addition he is a very good companion, friendly and positive. He is Always
> willing to help his fellows.”

---

_Nicolás Rossi_, Character TD & Pipeline Development at Assembly,
> “I have had the luck of working side by side with César and I learned a lot
> from him. He is always thinking out of the box solutions for every needs
> within a production environment. His rigs, tools, knowledge, talent and ideas
> makes him an unique artist.”
