Title: Going TDD: first steps...
Author: Cesar Saez
Tags: code, thoughts

Hi folks,

I have a confession to make: I've always looked at test driven development
with envy and admiration, but I had never really tried it due to the strong 
dependencies of the code I usually write... but it's even worse, I had never
put a fair amount of effort on testing due to the same reason (I know, shame 
on me).

Until one day I finally swallowed my excuses and decided to go TDD on a
proper project (`mauto`, more on this in a future post)... and you know what?
it worked great!

I'm taking my first steps on this and I have no authority to 'teach' TDD, but
I'm sure there are many TDs/technical-artists with the same preconceptions on
testing and hopefully some of my humble findings could be useful for them.

---

## Why testing? I know it's a good practice but...

That was exactly my thought for a long time: "this code is not a core
library so it doesn't matter", "I have so many dependencies, I can't test this", "it would be nice but maybe later", "write tests sucks" 
and so on.

The thruth is: writing tests leads you to _write better code_ and
_enables you to refactor_ your stuff without breaking everything as
you do it. Think of it as a tool to back you up as you progressively refine
the project.

Whithout tests you can't really work this way, your first take has to be
the good one (which is never the case) and any later modification comes with
a huge penalty, breaking existing code is inevitable.


### What about dependencies?

Most tools I write are meant to be executed within a DCC (maya, softimage,
whatever) and there's a strong dependency on their APIs... So, how
to test this stuff?

Encapsulate your dependencies! _write testable code is up to you._

The first change I noticed on myself was the need to think about
dependencies in order to test my code, I started to
encapsulate stuff instead of call _expensive resources_ all over the
place (i.e. writing all calls to the filesystem in a particular module,
DCC calls on other and so on).

I'm not saying you have to write a complex software-agnostic wrapper or
anything like that, just do your best to keep things thight in order to know
where your dependencies are, otherwise you won't be able to _replace_
them when testing your code.

> Forcing yourself to be aware of dependencies seems to be a win/win situation
> as it enforces a clear separation of concerns on your code
> (even if you are not going to write any test).

---

## Sounds good, where to start?

### Structure:

We need to define a structure for our project! _I highly recommend_ stick to
the standard structure for python projects/packages, here's a
[quickstart guide](http://guide.python-distribute.org/quickstart.html).

> You can also create your base structure using something like
> [coockiecutter](https://github.com/audreyr/cookiecutter) or similar tools,
> most IDEs set a base project for you.


### Testing frameworks:

In order to rely on your tests to develop is extremely important have a
mechanism to systematicaly run the test suite, it sounds obvious
but it's not.

Python include several ways to write/run tests, for _really_ simple use cases
you can go with [doctest](https://docs.python.org/2/library/doctest.html),
but most of the time you will be better of writing your test in a separate
module using somthing like [unittest](https://docs.python.org/2/library/unittest.html).

These modules works fine, but I personally feel more confortable using a
boilerplate-free alternative as [nose](https://nose.readthedocs.org) or
[pytest](https://pytest.org). Just choose your weapon and stick with it!


### Mock:

Other important aspect of testing has to do with replacing the
_expensive resources_ during testing, this way you can run them faster and
without affecting production assets in case something goes wrong (databases
and what not).

For this situations there's a python library called
[mock](https://pypi.python.org/pypi/mock). I won't cover how to use it, but it 
provides a nice placeholder that you can use to monkeypatch your dependencies 
during your tests. For further information refer to its
[documentation](http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/mock/).

---

## Everything is set, now what?

Short answer: _start with the readme file!_

This is not TDD per-se, but write down a high level snippet about how to use
your code is really useful and gives you a nice starting point.

Let's say we want to develop a pose library (this comes from the top of my
head, please do not take this example too seriously):

    ::python
    import pose_lib

    # init rig from the scene
    ROOT_NODE = "C_John_root_C_GRP" # node name
    rig = pose_lib.Rig(ROOT_NODE)

    # list john compatible poses
    pose_lib.list_poses('John')

    # apply a pose to John's rig
    pose = pose_lib.get_pose('John', 'stand')
    rig.set_pose(pose)

    # add John's current pose to the library
    pose = rig.current_pose()
    pose_lib.add_pose('John', 'my_pose', pose)

    # and so on...


Boom! We have just decided to interface with maya nodes through a class
called Rig and access the library through a couple of functions (there's
probably another class managing json-files/sqllite/any-kind-of-storage under
the hood).

Just think how you would like interact with your finished project and write
it down (wait a minute, we are also documenting!).


### Let's write some code!

First, let's assume this structure for our project:

* pose_lib/
    * pose_lib/
        * tests/
            * \__init__.py
        * \__init__.py
    * LICENSE.txt
    * README.txt
    * setup.py


The first test is the hardest! that's why the readme is so important.

1- Reading the readme snippet I would go writting a test as follow:

    ::python
    # file: pose_lib/pose_lib/tests/test_library.py
    from nose import test_with
    import pose_lib

    def setup():
        pose_lib.add_set('test')

    def tear_down():
        pose_lib.remove_set('test')

    @test_with(setup, tear_down)
    def test_list_poses()
        assert isinstance(pose_lib.list_poses('test'), (list, tuple))

> `setup` and `teardown` functions are executed before and after the test
> function (the decorated function), other testing frameworks (this one is
> `nose` specific) should provide a similar way to do this.

2- ... which lead us to write this:

    ::python
    # file: pose_lib/pose_lib/__init__.py

    def add_set(set_name)
        pass

    def remove_set(set_name)
        pass

    def list_poses(set_name):
        pass

3- ... and run the tests (from the root directory in a terminal):

    python setup.py nosetests

> Most IDEs and code editors have a built in function to run the test suite for
> you, if you're using an editor like sublime text you can take advantage of
> the build system to run the tests.

4- ... and refactor the code until all tests pass...

5- ... and write new tests...

6- ... and repeat until the project is completed.

---

## Do you see where we're going with this?

Is that simple! of course there will be some work to do in modules with
dependencies (take a look at mock's [docs](http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/mock/);
there are ways to patch objects, simulate return values and so on).
With not-so-much effort you should be able to run your tests outside
maya/softimage/whatever as any other python developer (that means you can go
faster and lighter on early stages of the project and hopefully write better
code).

There's much more to say about testing and TDD, things like coverage
and what not... but I think this is enough for a first contact.


Is it doable on the project you are working on?
Do you have any experience working like this?
Anything to share?

Would love to hear what you think about this, please leave me your
comments below.

Cheers!