---

title: The future of rigging
description: A revolution is coming, are you ready?
date: 2016-06-14
tags: [thoughts, rigging]

---
<!--more-->
Hi folks,

I have been thinking about an interesting topic to start a discussion over here, it has been a
while since the last one, and I thought about sharing a bit of what we have been talking (and
working on) with some colleagues at work lately regarding what's going on in rigging and where are
we going as an industry, it's a very interesting topic to me and I'm very curious about your
thoughts on this, so here we go... The future of rigging!


## A revolution is coming... Eventually

If you know me, or have had a chat with me about rigging in the past, you will know that I have
been thinking about this for a long time, there's even an old entry ([a rigger's
journey](https://www.cesarsaez.me/2013/11/rigger-journey.html)) touching on this.

Actually, if you take a second to read my [linkedin](http://www.linkedin.com/in/cesarsaez) profile,
you will see that one of the first paragraphs goes like this (this text has been like this since I
created the profile, many years ago).

> I look forward to further develop my career as technical artist, I firmly believe that there is
> much room for improvement on our workflow __and the current paradigm in my area of
> specialization__, I want to be part of the change.

And it's not about big words, I _really mean it!_ I'm certain that a revolution is coming, it _has_
to happen, but I wasn't sure what the big change will look like... Until now.


## What's going on in rigging?

So rigging tech hasn't changed much in the last 10 years, we have more complex assets to work with,
less time, but the tech itself hasn't changed much (other than OSD and some proprietary/patented
tech). If anything it is more accessible thanks to the internet and online courses on the subject
(not as many as animation or modeling, but you know, there are a few).

So where's the revolution?

Well, in order to talk about the future we need to take a look at the past...  If you were able to
rig an IK/FK limb 10 years ago, you were set for success, but today's standards _and expectations_
are way higher than that.

Right now, riggers are a mix of things, you have to be a bit technical to automate things in order
to deliver rigs in a reasonable time frame (the complexity of high-end rigs demand automation, it's
not optional anymore) and artistic enough to hack your way around in order to deliver believable and
appealing deformations.

Said that, riggers do not need to be engineers or sculptors, it's a weird middle ground, _and
that's exactly what I think is about to change_.



## Learning from the past

If we take a look at what happened to other specialities, it's clear that after some period of time
were artists hacked their way around the tech to get a decent looking product out of the door,
there's an inflection point where specialized developers have to step in allowing artists to be
artists and engineers to be engineers, hacking stuff around is not enough anymore.

A perfect example of this is _shading_, some years ago shading artists used to program/hack shaders
together in interpreted-languages/visual-programming and somehow eyeball surface effects until get
the desired look, as a result shading was _very_ dependent on lighting conditions and it was very
difficult to have a consistent look across a variety of environments. After a while, people
realized that in order to achieve physically plausible results we need to move to more complex
models and the entire industry moved the tech side of things to specialized developers/engineers
while leaving the artistic decisions to artists. We went from technical artists eyeballing shaders
according to each lighting condition to photorealism, and the only way to get there was thanks to
the split.

I firmly believe that _rigging has reached that inflection point_.


## But I love rigging, is it going to disappear?

It's not going to disappear, but it will change (and we need to change). I think rigging will stop
being a mix of things and will become a bit more serious in order to advance the tech behind it...
We cannot move forward at the pace assets are moving by using constraints and linear skinning, or
having layered rigs running at 6 FPS.

If you take a look at rigging openings on big studios you have a clear split between studios
looking for _artists with some technical skills_ (great sensibility to achieve appealing
deformations, plus some scripting abilities to survive while using proprietary tools) and the ones
looking for _technical minded people with some artistic sensibility_ (basically engineers able to
create the tech enabling modelers and animators to articulate the puppets in a believable way).

_The split is happening and the gap will only increase_ until we reach the point where the artistic
input can be done directly by modelers/animators (there will be an intermediate time where riggers
basically assemble rigs from libraries and deal with tech annoyances, wait... That's now! :) )


## Where to go from here? How to survive?

If you are all about deformations and appealing, I highly recommend to move towards modeling
(specifically sculpting), that's really the area where those skills shine (and will keep shining
for a while)... Also being familiar with rigging requirements in terms of topology is a big plus!

On the other hand, if you are into technology, I think rigging will become way more close to
software dev and knowing 4 things about for loops and variables will not be enough anymore, after
all coding is the new literacy and knowing the alphabet will be considered the baseline for most
areas sooner than later.

In order to really make this happen, we will need to step up big time and become a
developer/engineer (I'm not talking about the degree, but the mindset), have a clear understanding
of the main programming paradigms (OOP, pure functional), being able to design reasonable APIs,
understand data, being able to develop fast code by understanding the hardware (especially GPUs,
parallel computing is already a big deal when it comes to deformations).

In short, not cut corners and do the work towards those topics (not dogmas, the real stuff), learn
all the lessons we can from software development in order to not make the same mistakes.

---

There you go, that's my Armageddon right there... Of course it will not be black or white, there's
a lot of room for all kind of skills on studios of all sizes, but if you really want to have an
impact I think the changes are right there around the corner and now is the best time to start
shaping your career towards what really moves you.

What do you think? Am I crazy? Please let me know in the comments below :)


Cheers!
